Mobile App Deployment Guide Iteration - Voice and Tone (#3686)
mattermost/docs: source/deployment/mobile-app-deployment.rst

    **Note:** Some features described in this guide are only available in Enterprise Edition E10 and/or E20.

*******************
Learning Objectives
Learning objectives
*******************

This guide provides foundational information necessary when developing a plan for a proof of concept and/or enterprise mobile deployment. 

> It does not include technical implementation guidance. Links to relevant documentation are included however.

Reviewer: Recommend moving to the end of this section and modifying to "Technical implementation guides are included as  links to keep the information in this guide focused."

This includes:

- Choosing how to obtain and distribute the Mattermost mobile applications
- Determining the ideal mobile deployment model for your organization
- Understanding the resource requirements when choosing to build your own Mattermost mobile apps

> Technical implementation guides are included as links to keep the information in this guide focused.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Technical implementation guides are included as links to keep the information in this guide concise.
```

Reviewer 2: ('focused' may have multiple meanings such as 'focused on one topic')

**Documentation**
    We link to a lot of `mobile-specific documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-overview.html>`_ within this guide, but we encourage you to check `all of our documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/>`_.
**Forums**
    For more troubleshooting help, `open a new topic in our forums <https://forum.mattermost.org/c/trouble-shoot>`_ with steps to reproduce your issue.
**GitHub**
    Visit us on `GitHub <https://github.com/mattermost/>`_ to create issues in any of our repositories.
**Enterprise Support**
    If you are an Enterprise Edition subscriber, you may open a support ticket in the `Enterprise Edition Support portal <https://mattermost.com/support/>`_.

----

################################
Before you begin your deployment
################################

A successful mobile deployment is an important part of your experience with Mattermost.

Our highest priority is making sure you have what you need to be successful, but keep in mind that any change, even beneficial, will have an impact on your users. To ensure your success you need to identify the goals for your mobile deployment.

> For example, using the publicly available Mattermost mobile apps on Google Play and Apple App Store can reduce a deployment to minutes. Better yet, this model can be rolled out to thousands of users in many different countries and languages.

Reviewer 2: We can write more concisely by being direct, without losing the intended tone to the reader

```suggestion
For example, you can deploy to thousands of users across the world in minutes with the publicly available Mattermost mobile apps on Google Play and Apple App Store.
```

Of course, large enterprise deployments will take more time, and the overall goals for your deployment will depend on many factors. We recommend taking a moment to write down what a successful deployment looks like. To start, ask yourself and your team what you want to achieve, what are your desired outcomes?

> This takes a small amount of time up front. But, we have seen the difference this makes in successful projects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This takes a small amount of time upfront. But, we have seen the difference this makes in successful projects.
```

- Is a VPN connection required?
- Do we use an Enterprise Mobile Management (EMM) Provider?

Again, this means pausing before you jump into your Mattermost mobile deployment. But it will make all the difference in ensuring you see a return on your investment.

----

###################################
Mattermost mobile deployment primer
###################################

While Mattermost provides options to make mobile deployment as easy as possible, it will take time and iteration.

This primer serves as an introduction to Mattermost mobile technologies. It is a complement to our technical documentation, and focuses on three main areas:

- Technical Requirements
- Basic Features and Technologies
- Troubleshooting

> Regardless of your expertise, we recommend reading this section before starting your deployment. And keep in mind, we are here to support_ you.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Regardless of your expertise, we recommend reading this section before starting your deployment. And keep in mind, we are here to support you.
```

Reviewer 3: Not sure if this is meant to be a link.

Author: it is ;)

> Regardless of your expertise, we recommend reading this section before starting your deployment. And keep in mind, we are here to support_ you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regardless of your expertise, we recommend reading this section before starting your deployment. And keep in mind, we are here to support you.
```

Author: This is on purpose and should link (at least it works on my local build) to the support section of the document while rendering as `support`.

Reviewer 3: Non-blocking comment: I'm wondering if a link might render better - i.e., as a hyperlink and not the same font that we use for indicating file names (e.g., config.json).

Reviewer 3: Disregard my comment. I've done a local build and the link renders as expected. 

<img width="1030" alt="Screen Shot 2020-06-23 at 12 41 30" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4223530/85394456-e149ad00-b54e-11ea-97c1-b9569e20bd83.png">

For those taking on larger deployments, we assume you are already using an EMM provider.

AppConfig is newer, more modern approach when compared to the previous standard, app wrapping.

AppConfig (supported) vs. app wrapping (not supported)
======================================================

    **Note:** Mattermost only supports the AppConfig standard. It does not support app wrapping. Use app wrapping at your own risk.

> Here is `a helpful article  <https://www.computerworld.com/article/3209907/app-wrapping-the-key-to-more-secure-mobile-app-management.html>`_ defining AppConfig and app wrapping, let us take a look at AppConfig first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is `a helpful article  <https://www.computerworld.com/article/3209907/app-wrapping-the-key-to-more-secure-mobile-app-management.html>`_ defining AppConfig and app wrapping. Let us take a look at AppConfig first.
```

> AppConfig is newer, more modern approach when compared to the previous standard, App Wrapping.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
AppConfig is newer, more modern approach when compared to the previous standard, app wrapping.
```

AppConfig (supported) vs. app wrapping (not supported)
======================================================

>     **Note:** Mattermost only supports the AppConfig standard. It does not support app wrapping. Use app wrapping at your own risks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    **Note:** Mattermost only supports the AppConfig standard. It does not support app wrapping. Use app wrapping at your own risk.
```

> There are `some great articles <https://www.computerworld.com/article/3209907/app-wrapping-the-key-to-more-secure-mobile-app-management.html>`_ defining AppConfig and app wrapping, let us take a look at AppConfig first.

Reviewer 3: Should we change this to "a great article" or possibly include a few more articles to round it off?

Author: I'd change it to 

> Here is a great article ...

WDYT @justinegeffen

Reviewer 3: I'd possibly reword it to "Here is a helpful article" as opposed to "great" unless we're certain that the referenced article is considered great by multiple trusted sources. 3/5 as this type of writing is different to technical documentation.

Author: I'm 0/5 here, I just went with the wording in your suggestion ;)

AppConfig
---------

"A community focused on providing tools and best practices around native capabilities in mobile operating systems to enable a more consistent, open and simple way to configure and secure mobile apps in order to increase mobile adoption in business." - AppConfig.org

So that sounds great, but are there any benefits for users?

Again, in the AppConfig Community’s words, "Users benefit with instant mobile productivity and a seamless out-of-the box experience, and businesses benefit with secure work-ready apps with minimal setup required while leveraging existing investments in Enterprise Mobility Management (EMM), VPN, and identity solutions. Put another way, your apps are simpler to configure, secure and deploy."

> For now, focus on that last part, "... your apps are simpler to configure, secure and deploy." AppConfig provides the most efficient and scalable path for success. As an admin this means easier deployment and management of mobile applications. And again, when it comes to Mattermost, it’s our only supported approach.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For now, focus on that last part, "... your apps are simpler to configure, secure and deploy." AppConfig provides the most efficient and scalable path for success. As an admin this means easier deployment and management of mobile applications. And again, when it comes to Mattermost, it is our only supported approach.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Wondering if the three quotes mentioned above should have links to the article in question? Or are they all from: https://www.computerworld.com/article/3209907/app-wrapping-the-key-to-more-secure-mobile-app-management.html?

Author: That is a great question! AFAIK they are all direct quotes from [appconfig.org](https://www.appconfig.org)

Reviewer 3: Might be helpful to link to that article or specific section in the article to provide content for the reader? 3/5; not sure what the standard for quotes is in CE docs. :)

Author: No, I mean it's literally on appconfig.com, right on their front page.

![appconfig](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11317357/84890366-99341180-b09a-11ea-8b16-35b60dee8e16.png)

Reviewer 3: Great. :)

Application (App) Wrapping
--------------------------

> From the article we `referenced earlier <https://www.computerworld.com/article/3209907/app-wrapping-the-key-to-more-secure-mobile-app-management.html>`_, application(app) wrapping involves "...the use of an SDK from an EMM vendor that allows a developer or admin to deploy an API that enables management policies to be set up." 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From the article we `referenced earlier <https://www.computerworld.com/article/3209907/app-wrapping-the-key-to-more-secure-mobile-app-management.html>`_, application (app) wrapping involves "...the use of an SDK from an EMM vendor that allows a developer or admin to deploy an API that enables management policies to be set up." 
```

In the end, this sets app wrapping in a negative light. This is the reason the `AppConfig Community <https://www.appconfig.org>`_ came together to create a standard. AppConfig is a modern, efficient, and scalable approach to enterprise mobile management. In that regard, the Mattermost application benefits from being built around this standard.

******************
Mobile VPN options
******************

> A Virtual Private Networks (VPN) allows a device outside a firewall to access content inside the firewall as if it were on the same network. Most enterprise teams are familiar with VPNs. We won't go into detail here.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Virtual Private Network (VPN) allows a device outside a firewall to access content inside the firewall as if it were on the same network. Most enterprise teams are familiar with VPNs. We won't go into detail here.
```

> A Virtual Private Network (VPN) allows a device outside a firewall to access content inside the firewall as if it were on the same network. Most enterprise teams are familiar with VPNs. We won't go into detail here.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Virtual Private Network (VPN) allows a device outside a firewall to access content inside the firewall as if it were on the same network. Most enterprise teams are familiar with VPNs. We will not go into detail here.
```

There are VPN options which depend on the requirements of your organization. You should also consider the demands/needs of your users. Regardless, this can impact your approach to mobile deployment.

For the Mattermost mobile application, we will discuss two options: a device VPN or per-app VPN.

    **Note:** We suggest `following our recommended steps <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-appstore-install.html>`_ to secure your deployment.

**Device VPN**

>     This is not as common, especially in the case of Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) scenarios. In this option, all internet traffic routes through the VPN specified in the profile. This could cause issue for personal applications.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    This is not as common, especially in the case of Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) scenarios. In this option, all internet traffic routes through the VPN specified in the profile. This could cause issues for personal applications.
```

*Disadvantages:* No app customization

*********************************************
Distributing custom builds of the mobile apps
*********************************************

> **Desired Outcomes:**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Desired Outcomes**:
```

----

#####################################################
Mobile deployment via public app stores (recommended)
#####################################################

To proceed you must have a Mattermost Server installed and accessible. This is also true for using the hosted version of the Mattermost push proxy (HPNS).

*********************************
Accessing the mobile applications
*********************************

> The Mattermost mobile application is available for both Android and iOS devices. At this point, it’s as simple as having your users download the application and `point to your Mattermost Server URL <https://docs.mattermost.com/help/getting-started/signing-in.html#ios-setup>`_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Mattermost mobile application is available for both Android and iOS devices. At this point, it is as simple as having your users download the application and `point to your Mattermost Server URL <https://docs.mattermost.com/help/getting-started/signing-in.html#ios-setup>`_.
```

- Creating a sample configuration then run validation tests against each config item

**********************************
Configuring Mattermost to use HPNS
**********************************

Configuring your Mattermost Server to use the Mattermost HPNS is a single configuration item. This is covered in our `Hosted Push Notification Service documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-hpns.html>`_. 

Next your users would need to install the mobile application on their device. If desired, you can further configure security capabilities using an EMM provider.

**********************************
Updating via the public store apps
**********************************

> While not part of your initial mobile deployment, you should consider a strategy for updating when new versions of the Mattermost mobile applications are available. Simultaneously, you should check any compatibility requirements for the mobile apps and the Mattermost server. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While not part of your initial mobile deployment, you should consider a strategy for updating when new versions of the Mattermost mobile applications are available. Simultaneously, you should check any compatibility requirements for the mobile apps and the Mattermost Server. 
```

----

###################################
Mobile deployment via custom builds
###################################

Choosing this model means you have decided not to use the mobile applications Mattermost has made available via the public app stores. 

> This also means you will need to maintain these applications. Maintenance includes rebuilding and incorporating feature and/or security updates. Otherwise, your applications will not match the functionality of our publicly available applications, and could be incompatible with future versions of the Mattermost server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This also means you will need to maintain these applications. Maintenance includes rebuilding and incorporating feature and/or security updates. Otherwise, your applications will not match the functionality of our publicly available applications, and could be incompatible with future versions of the Mattermost Server.
```

Finally, this choice also means you cannot use the hosted version of the Mattermost Push Notification Service (MPNS).

> As a first step for this deployment model is `reviewing the documentation <https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/mobile/>`_. Your development team should run through the requirements for building the applications. This documentation provides guidance on building, compiling, and signing. It also includes information for customizing the apps.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A first step for this deployment model is `reviewing the documentation <https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/mobile/>`_. Your development team should run through the requirements for building the applications. This documentation provides guidance on building, compiling, and signing. It also includes information for customizing the apps.
```

- This process is more common if you are looking to white label the app to remove Mattermost branding

******************************************************
Using an EMM Provider with your custom Mattermost apps
******************************************************

> If you will be using an EMM provider, note that Mattermost does not support App Wrapping. Instead we use the AppConfig standard.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you will be using an EMM provider, note that Mattermost does not support app wrapping. Instead we use the AppConfig standard.
```

> In some instances, there is an incompatibility with App Wrapping and React Native Applications. React Native is the technology used to develop the Mattermost mobile applications. The Mattermost mobile app will not function properly when using app wrapping. In fact, a majority of the app wrappers EMMs provide do not support WebSocket connections.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In some instances, there is an incompatibility with app wrapping and React Native applications. React Native is the technology used to develop the Mattermost mobile applications. The Mattermost mobile app will not function properly when using app wrapping. In fact, a majority of the app wrappers EMMs provide do not support WebSocket connections.
```

- Creating a sample configuration then run validation tests against each config item

****************************************************
Configuring the MPNS for your custom Mattermost apps
****************************************************

Building and distributing the Mattermost mobile apps requires you to deploy an instance of the MPNS.

> As part of the process of building the applications you will need to sign the applications. You must also obtain the appropriate certificate for both Android and iOS. If this is not done, the applications will not be able to interact with Your instance of the MPNS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As part of the process of building the applications you will need to sign the applications. You must also obtain the appropriate certificate for both Android and iOS. If this is not done, the applications will not be able to interact with your instance of the MPNS.
```

- `Additional FAQs <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#>`_

************************************
Updating your custom Mattermost apps
************************************

> While not part of your initial mobile deployment, you should consider a strategy for updating when new versions of the Mattermost Mobile applications are available. We highly recommend you update your custom Mattermost apps for any security or service releases. At the same time, if you have updated the apps, prior to distribution, check any compatibility requirements for the mobile apps and the Mattermost server. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While not part of your initial mobile deployment, you should consider a strategy for updating when new versions of the Mattermost mobile applications are available. We highly recommend you update your custom Mattermost apps for any security or service releases. At the same time, if you have updated the apps, prior to distribution, check any compatibility requirements for the mobile apps and the Mattermost server. 
```
